---
slug: "/blogs/stardom"
date: "2020-06-16"
title: "A perspective on promoting stardom"
---

[Home](/)>[Blogs](/blogs)

### <p align="center">A perspective on promoting stardom</p>

Mindfulness isn't just about being in control of emotions when we're going through extreme emotions, it's also about understanding the subtle triggers that shape our behaviour and stardom is one of the things that influences a lot of people and I can clearly remember the time when it was a driving factor in my life due to the programming I'd had from my environment. 

In his book, [Sapiens](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23692271-sapiens), Yuval Noah Harari explains how our society has evolved. There was a time where we had small communities that were self-sufficient in terms of producing food, shelter and clothing. There were very few people offering the same service, which meant that in the small bubble, they were the expert. What globalisation has done is that apart from the people who are seen as "The" global experts, everyone else (depending on their state of mind) are exposed to a feeling of dissatisfaction. This happens at various levels though, best in the team, best in the company, best in the industry etc. There are people that I've met in my career who are not aspiring to be the best - they say they are at their best and this is as far as they can go with their circumstances and it is sufficient for them, which makes me wonder if they see this as a compromise due to their circumstances and then there are a few rare ones who just are - neither best, nor their best, they just are. What is this word best? It demonstrates that someone has 'better' ability to do something than the others. The only way to arrive at the best is by doing a comparison and comparison can only be done by establishing bias. Let's park this thought. 

A lot of people talk about luck as a factor in life. Luck is another name for probability. At a small scale, probability balances things out, for example, when I play snakes and ladders with my son, overall, we win a similar number of games. It's the same with flipping coins. At a larger scale, given the number of occurrences of an event, it is not likely that probabilities will favour everyone in the same way in a given context. In the book [Behave](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/31170723-behave), Robert Sapolsky talks about how our genes predispose us to certain behaviours, however, our environment shapes most of our thinking and behaviours. Both of these factors are outside of one's influence in the formative years of their lives, and beyond the formative years, one could say that the environment that one chooses may still be based on what they were exposed to in the formative years. Given this background, luck or probability does play a major role in basic attributes that our society promotes through stardom - dedication, intelligence, focus and above all achieving outcomes for the team, company or the society. 

Another perspective on stardom is that it favours the capitalist society in so many ways - people get fascinated by people, which creates a brand that those individuals and other organisations can capitalise. It generates news for the media, it facilitates events where people are awarded etc. and each of these things generates money for a lot of people. This can also promote dissatisfaction as discussed in [this blog](https://www.themindfulway.org/blogs/blogs-does-society-promote-dissatisfaction)

Now let's put all of this together. Probabilities play a huge role in our behaviours and the outcomes that we drive, and yet we promote individuals as being best at something. The message we are giving to the society is that your genes and environment didn't offer pre-disposition or opportunity to be this individual that you could've been. While the richest people on the planet, or the best chefs, or the best actors do what they do really well, it doesn't actually mean anything, because most of the things we do are made up anyway and there is no need for perfection in most of these things - Money loses its meaning beyond a certain point, taste in food is good enough at a certain point, a house that can protect us from weather is good enough, but the capitalist world is highly dependent on people being dissatisfied with some options, which make them explore other options and that keeps the businesses running. It just demonstrates that out of ~7.8 billion people, based on the fundamentals of probabilities, someone was going to be at the right place at the right time with the right mindset to be at the top. What is right after all, the context of what we're looking to maximise is what makes it right, otherwise, right is just the opposite of the word wrong that we've created to demonstrate bias in our minds. 

Why does the society promote stardom though? To push others to do more and to find the next star that the society can promote through news, adverts, awards etc. to drive a certain type of behaviour. The individual is actually a means to an end, and the end is to promote behaviours. Is stardom the only way to promote behaviour when we know that out of billions of people, only one can be at the top of every field? One could say that there's nothing wrong with promoting certain behaviours in the society by using individuals as examples. It can inspire others to be like them. Does the word inspire also root in dissatisfaction though? According to [Cambridge dictionary](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/inspire), the word inspire means "to make someone feel that they want to do something and can do it". The word want is quite key here, when we want something, it means that there is judgement or bias towards what is. Buddha's mindfulness technique, [Vipasssana](https://www.dhamma.org/en/about/vipassana) is deeply rooted in observing the cravings and aversions that arise in our mind and not associating oneself with these feelings. Wanting is a form of carving. 

What does this concept of stardom do to others who are never in that league and what's the cost of promoting stardom? Dissatisfaction, stress, anxiety and depression (in extreme cases) are some of the outcomes of this choice that we've made as a society. 

What if we didn't promote stardom at all? It may be that as a society we will be deprived of the best acting, the best tasting food or the best speech - are these the basis of our lives? Is this what we need or what we desire? What if the whole world didn't progress at the pace it is progressing? A lot of people believe that the current setup of the society is anyway creating the divide between the rich and the poor, so what if we were all just about average - like most others. Is there a chance that it bring us all closer? 

This is not to suggest that stardom is good or bad, as that would just mean bias towards stardom. This is a perspective on what it promotes in the society and it's an exploration of what the society could be in its absence. When I reflect on the times I was influenced by stardom, it only reminds me of stress, pressure to do more, desire to be the next star, the momentary feeling of being a star and then realising that the feeling evaporates in a few days if not hours or seconds. 

What if we just performed actions without thinking about being the next star and what if we stopped promoting stardom? It is likely that the stars will get less recognition and income than they currently do. In all likelihood, it may mean that people are not as motivated to do their job well as they would with the recognition, but what is this recognition after all? Promotion of the idea of a self and others and the self being better than the others in some way, shape or form. What if we all destroyed this idea of the self being better or worse and just be? We all need to do something to stay alive, and if we just keep doing whatever we do, in whatever capacity we have, then there will be enough of what we all need for everyone. It may not give us what we desire though. Desire or craving is what leads to dissatisfaction and keeps the capitalist world going, so what would the world look like without it?
